---
title: LC 155 - Min Stack
date: 2024-06-28 0000:00:00 +0800
categories: [LeetCode, NeetCode150]
tags: [leetcode, neetcode150, stack]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
toc: true
math: true
---

## Question

Design a stack that supports push, pop, top, and retrieving the minimum element in constant time.

Implement the `MinStack` class:

- `MinStack()` initializes the stack object.
- `void push(int val)` pushes the element `val` onto the stack.
- `void pop()` removes the element on the top of the stack.
- `int top()` gets the top element of the stack.
- `int getMin()` retrieves the minimum element in the stack.

You must implement a solution with `O(1)` time complexity for each function.

**Example 1:**

    Input
    ["MinStack","push","push","push","getMin","pop","top","getMin"]
    [[],[-2],[0],[-3],[],[],[],[]]

    Output
    [null,null,null,null,-3,null,0,-2]

**Explanation**
MinStack minStack = new MinStack();       
minStack.push(-2);      
minStack.push(0);     
minStack.push(-3);      
minStack.getMin(); // return -3      
minStack.pop();      
minStack.top();    // return 0      
minStack.getMin(); // return -2       

**Constraints:**

- `-231 <= val <= 231 - 1`
- Methods `pop`, `top` and `getMin` operations will always be called on **non-empty** stacks.
- At most `3 * 104` calls will be made to `push`, `pop`, `top`, and `getMin`.

## Links
Question [here](https://leetcode.com/problems/min-stack/) and solution [here](https://github.com/etherion-1337/LeetCode/blob/master/medium/155_min_stack/solution.py)

## Solution

### concept
The main issue here is the `getMin()` method which needs to be $O(1)$. Normal stack do not have this feature.
In this case we use *2 stack* to keep track: 1 for the normal store and retrieval, and 1 for storing the *current* minimum value.
When we add in a value, we will add in to the first stack normally, the second stack will also be added but comparing to the `-1` index of the min_stack (i.e. current minimum value).
When we pop value, we pop from both stack.

Take note that my implementation initially keep track minimum in `self.min` and only update this value in the `push` method but not during `pop` method and this is wrong.
It is much easier just to look at `-1` index of the min_stack to know what is the current minimum in the stack since this property propagate through the min_stack.

### code
```python
class MinStack:

    def __init__(self):
        self.stack = []
        self.min_stack = []

    def push(self, val: int) -> None:
        self.stack.append(val)
        if self.min_stack:
            self.min_stack.append(min(val, self.min_stack[-1]))
        else:
            self.min_stack.append(val)
        
    def pop(self) -> None:
        self.stack.pop()
        self.min_stack.pop()
        
    def top(self) -> int:
        return self.stack[-1]
        
    def getMin(self) -> int:
        return self.min_stack[-1]
```
## Complexity
time: $O(1)$       
space: $O(n)$ 